So let's talk about
some common algorithms.
Not all of these are ones that
we're gonna tackle again.
These are just things that you'll hear,
that you'll Google, you'll find.
There are sorting algorithms.
A couple of the most famous ones
are BubbleSort and QuickSort,
there are dozens of other ones.
There's all kinds of general and
specialized sorts for
different conditions.
I'm gonna be straight up honest with you,
I don't care about sorting at all.
It's the least interesting
DSA topic to me.
People have figured that out, they've
written volumes of information about them.
And the most that I've ever cared about
the sorting algorithm is I love the little
fancy animations where they show how
it works conceptually or whatever.
That's about as much as I'm gonna care, so
we're not gonna deal with sorting in this.
And sorting is one of those key common
topics that are covered in a DSA course.
I'm just gonna skip it cuz I
think it's not as interesting.
If I need to sort something,
I'm pretty likely to just use
the built-in JavaScript sort.
And if that's somehow for
some reason not gonna work,
then I'm just gonna grab a QuickSort
implementation most likely.
I'm not gonna get much deeper than that,
in my own coding.
But your mileage may vary,
your mileage will vary on that.
All right so setting aside sorts,
there are things that I find
much more interesting, and
the kinds of work that I tackle,
I seem to come across a lot more often.
Traversing things like trees and graphs,
and when we get into graphs, we have this
interesting concept called path finding,
which is, I have this multi-connected
set of these different elements that
will be called nodes in a graph.
And they may not actually have
direct connections to each other.
So there's various different circuitous
routes that I could take to go from one
node in the graph to
another node in the graph.
And there are different reasons why I
might wanna take one route versus another.
For example, you might have
what's called a weighted graph,
meaning that the connection
between node A and
B costs more for some definition of
cost than the connection from A to C.
And it might be that a longer route,
meaning more hops,
costs less than the more direct route.
So we can think about variety of
different real world metaphors for this,
like toll bridges and things like that.
There's a more circuitous route
that costs less, takes you longer.
There's the more direct route,
you get there quicker, but
now you've gotta pay a higher toll.
By the way, I talk about toll roads and
toll bridges.
I used to think that must be one of
those universal cultural references, and
it's not.
I've gone places in the world that people
are like, you have to pay to use a road?
It's completely foreign to them.
I grew up in the land of toll roads.
I happily pay that as one of
my little life's luxury taxes.
I don't worry about toll roads, but for
some people, that's a foreign concept, so.
Maybe you need a different metaphor there.
Insert your own metaphor for
having something that you have to pay more
to get across or something, I don't know.
Anyway, so we have algorithms that
allow us to go through a tree.
And again, remember trees are ordered, so
the order that we go through
the tree is a big deal sometimes.
Sometimes we wanna just visit
every node in the tree and
it doesn't matter what
order we visit them in.
But many, and
I would say maybe even most of the time,
if we're gonna go through a tree,
the order matters.
The order matters, perhaps,
because we're processing all
of the elements in the tree.
And the operations that we're
processing with are not commutative, so
the order of the operations matters.
Sometimes it's that we're traversing
through a tree and we need to stop early.
So obviously, the order matters,
because if we go in the wrong order,
we're not gonna stop as
early as we wanted to.
So those are things to think about.
And then I threw up here binary search.
Similar to sorting,
search algorithms, to me,
seem pretty straightforward, and I,
again, don't end up implementing
search algorithms in
the classical sense very often.
But the concept of binary search,
we'll get into this in the next slide.
The concept of binary search being
recursive, that's pretty important.
So being able to understand the underlying
principle of something like binary search,
meaning divide a problem
into multiple pieces.
In the binary world, that's divided
into two pieces, so divided in half and
only work with half the problem,
and then divided again in half.
But there's higher order divisions where
you divide it into three or four or
whatever.
So binary is just the most common,
and that means divided in half.
Divide and conquer would be sort
of a general term for that.
And finally, a few of the techniques,
these are things that we'll go
through throughout the workshop.
These are common techniques that you
end up using to create your algorithms.
You implement algorithms, these are some
of those LEGO pieces that we put together.
Iteration, pretty straightforward things,
like for loops, while loops.
We're going to iterate in order for
a certain amount of time or
perhaps just an arbitrary amount of time.
When you have a while true loop,
that's just gonna keep going until
you've exhausted the entire space.
So that's iteration.
Recursion, one of those terms, I heard
somebody earlier talk about regular
expressions, those are things that we
can kinda be sometimes frightened about.
With recursion, it's similar.
There's a few other topics in computer
science that people kind of feel like
those are taboo or difficult.
That closure is one of those that
many people feel like you have to
have this special magical enlightenment
to be able to understand.
We are gonna use recursion a lot.
Depending on your level of
comfort with recursion,
some of that may feel a bit uncomfortable.
But you absolutely cannot make any
progress in this DSA topic and
data structures and algorithms
without getting comfortable with it.
So whereas somebody might be able to tell
you, you can get away with never using
a regular expression,
I don't necessarily agree with that.
But you might have somebody say, you don't
need a regular expression, there's other
ways to solve those problems, or
at least, abstract those problems.
While that might be true of regular
expressions, you can't get anywhere
[LAUGH] in this topic without getting
real comfortable with recursion.
So I think it's just one of those
bullets that we need to bite.
We need to tackle it, so
we're gonna use it quite a bit.
Put very simply, recursion means
that a function ends up calling
itself either directly or indirectly.
So a cycle of function calls where, well,
while the function is still running,
another indication on the call stack,
there's that word stack
that we referred to.
So you think about a function call, and
then when it calls another function while
it's still running, then it adds to
what we call the call stack, right?
So you have these functions
that call each other.
That's not the same thing as calling
a function, it finishing, and
then calling another function and
it finishing.
It's call function a, who then,
while it's running, invokes function b,
and while it's running,
invokes function c.
That's what we mean by the call stack,
that's stacking up.
And if a calls b and b calls a,
then you would have a stack,
you'd have a, b, a.
Or if a calls b, b call c, and
c calls a, now you have a cycle.
Either one of those is
what we call recursion.
And you might be thinking, why on earth
would you have a calling a or a calling b,
or why would you have direct or
indirect recursion?
Why would you allow that
sort of thing to happen?
The answer is that the call
stack is an abstraction
over iteration with state management.
Every time we invoke a new function,
we get a new set of state that is
encapsulated in that function call.
And therefore, we have this stack where
we're doing things, we're stacking
up work, a, b, c, d, however deep it goes,
could go 10,000 deep, right?
Each one of those individual
function calls has its own state.
And what we're asking the engine to do,
the JavaScript engine, in this case,
is manage that state for us in a stack,
where it pushes it on and pops it off.
The entire world of that function
gets pushed onto the stack, and
then when it's done, it pops off.
I don't wanna worry
about all of that stuff.
Well, what if I did worry about it?
I absolutely could take any
recursive algorithm and
implement it with an iteration,
with a while loop.
And what I would have to do is take
every bit of state that I need for
each one of those levels and
manage it in my own stack.
Can I do that?
Yes, sometimes I do do that, sometimes
I do implement something that we would
think of recursively, you can implement
it iteratively and vice versa.
They are what we call in
a formal mathematical term,
they're isomorphic of each other.
Any recursion can be expressed
iteratively, and in fact,
most compilers for most languages
unroll these sorts of things.
They will unroll recursion and
make it a loop or sometimes vice versa,
because the same is also true or
generally true.
So you have to be real
familiar with iteration.
And most of us that have done any
sort of imperative programming,
we're familiar with for loops and
while loops and so forth.
Maybe less familiar with recursion, but
you just need to understand that that's
asking the engine to do our iteration for
us.
It's an abstraction over iteration,
that says, I'm gonna need this state to be
separate for each of these iterations,
and I want you to manage that.
I'm gonna do that through the call stack
rather than through my own data structure.
In fact, we have examples of places in
modern framework world where the call
stack that, as we think of as being
a built-in thing that we just invoke and
use, turns out the call stack isn't quite
malleable enough for some frameworks.
And they have re-implemented the entire
concept of a call stack in the framework,
so that they have control.
I'm referring to react and fibers and
non-local continuations and stuff,
but you can get real deep with this.
So anything that you think of that's built
in, you could re-implement yourself.
You could implement memory
management yourself if you wanted.
You shouldn't, but you could, all right?
So recursion is just a dual of or
isomorphic of the iteration.
And sometimes it's more convenient to
invoke recursion than it is to do it
with iteration.
In fact, we'll see an example
where we're going through a tree.
And you typically think,
because trees are typically referred to as
a recursively-defined data structure,
because every node is its own sub tree.
That's what we mean by
recursively-defined data structure.
Because trees are recursive
data structures,
recursion is a very natural
operation to use to traverse them.
But that's not always true.
The breadth-first traversal, again,
we'll come back to this later, but
the breadth-first traversal of a tree
is much more complicated to represent
recursively.
In fact, most people don't
implement it recursively.
You could, but most people don't.
They implement it with
an iterative loop and a queue.
An interval loop plus a queue is
a breadth-first traversal of a tree.
We'll come back to some of that stuff,
so if that feels unfamiliar to you,
don't worry, we're coming back to it.
I'm just giving you a sense of how
these pieces can fit together.
Okay, the last thing I have listed
up here is indexes and references.
I've really come up with a good term
to describe what I mean here, but
I'm using indexes in the database sense.
When I talk about this
concept of an index,
you might have a name data structure,
let's say, for example, an array.
It's a sequentially-ordered
collection of values,
doesn't matter what the value types are,
just sequentially-ordered.
But you might want a separate data
structure alongside that array
that tells you something about some or
all of the elements in there.
Here's an example.
I wanna know all of
the elements in the array.
I need quick access to all of the elements
in the array whose value starts with
the letter a.
And that's literally
like what databases do.
When they create indexes, they have
this big old table of all your data.
And then they create these
separate data structures that say,
if you're gonna look for
all the things that start with a,
all the IDs that are even or whatever,
we maintain this separate list,
this separate data structure.
That's not a copy of the data, its
pointers, its references into the data.
This is extremely common in data
structure algorithm creation, is that we
construct the main data structure,
and rather than duplicating the data,
we construct these other data structures
that have references into these places.
And you can access it sequentially and
by name, if you will.
Those are generally at odds, but
we can have two parallel data structures,
one with references to the other.
That's what I mean here,
that's another extremely common technique.
So these are things that we
will see play out for us.